(Re)Mediating Alphabetic Language:
Alexander Melville Bell’s “Visible Speech” and the Conception and Use of Humans as Writing Instruments in the late 19th c. United States  

Johannah Rodgers
blah blah blah

Project Overview
As one section of a research project in the digital humanities dedicated to investigating relationships and dynamics amongst conceptions of verbal language, nineteenth century systems of shorthand, and the early history of college writing programs in the United States, (Re)Mediating Alphabetic Language traces the evolution and impact of Alexander Melville Bell’s "Visible Speech," a patented system of “universal shorthand,” in relation to Pitmanic and other systems of shorthand, to emerging communications technologies, particularly Alexander Graham Bell’s research related to the telephone, and to the foundation of the first college composition program in the United States at Harvard College in the 1870s.  Utilizing the manuscript and print resources in the Beale Shorthand Collection (1640 – 1910) and the Jerome B. Howard Shorthand Collection (1710-1912; bulk dates 1838-1912) at the New York Public Library’s Stephen A. Schwarzman Building will greatly enhance the progress and quality of the project by enabling the analysis as physical artifacts of several important documents and publications in the history of shorthand from the sixteenth to the twentieth centuries.

Project Background

What connections might exist between a typographical symbol signifying the emission of breath used in the formation of a spoken word in a printed diagram from an 1867 manual of shorthand by Herman Melville Bell and its digital equivalent in the Unix command line?  Could these graphical marks, despite their medial and temporal separation, be in some way related?  Graphically, there is no doubt that they can be connected: the greater than sign ( > ), as it is familiarly called, is a very common typographical mark used in any number of print and digital applications.  But what about the provenance of these two specific tokens of this particular mark?  As it turns out, they both act as instructions for acts of communication and both originate from work associated with Bell Technical Labs.  What is more, if we define Unix as a kind of “digital shorthand,” as the New York Times did in explaining its operations to a lay audience in a 2011 obituary of Dennis Ritchie, one of the authors of the Unix operating system, the possible connections between these two marks become all that more intriguing (Lohr).  Seeking to better understand the many roles and functions of technologies of inscription and writing instruction in the pasts, presents, and futures of computing machines, I plan to explore the historical connections between human and machine communication by analyzing the conditions that gave rise to Herman Melville Bell’s system of shorthand, which he called “Visible Speech,” its roles in the development of new communications technologies in the mid- and late- nineteenth century U.S., and its afterlives as a result of its influence and remediation in the technical, academic, and cultural imagination. 
Systems of shorthand, like other nineteenth-century innovations in the area of inscriptive practice and information and communications technologies (ICT), such as the telegraph, typewriter, phonograph, and telephone can each be interpreted, as Lisa Gitelman has argued, as presenting their own unique “theories of language and textuality.”   As composition instruction, writing practices, and scholarly activities in the twenty first century U.S. become more and more intertwined with digital technologies, the importance of understanding the genealogies of specific historical and contemporary ICTs, their intricate relations with the definitions and functions of verbal language, and the cultural, technical, and medial contexts in which they emerged have become increasingly important in the fields of the digital humanities and writing studies (Fuller, Haas, Heim, Kirschenbaum).  Of course, some technologies of inscription have more influence than others.  Although emerging quite late in the history of printed shorthand systems, the first of which was published by Timothie Bright in 1588, Melville Bell’s “Visible Speech” shorthand system has several notable characteristics: 
	•	its emergence after the commercial success of Isaac Pitman’s shorthand system in vocational education (Pitman)

	•	the fact that Alexander Graham Bell, an inventor of numerous late nineteenth century communications technologies, was a fluent reader and speaker of his father’s shorthand system (A. G. Bell, H. M. Bell, Gitelman) 
	•	the interest and attention dedicated to it by Adam Sherman Hill, the President of Harvard College and one of the founders of the first composition program the U.S. (Hitz, Hill) 
	•	its influence on the study of phonetics in the field of English language teaching and linguistics, particularly via the work of Henry Sweet (Sweet)  
	•	its depictions in popular theatrical and film media via its roles in George Bernard Shaw’s 1905 play Pygmalion and the film versions of My Fair Lady based on it (Shoulson, Weizenbaum) 
	•	the ongoing research into Visible Speech and multimodal communications systems at Bell Technical Labs throughout the nineteenth and twentieth centuries (Liu, Kopp, Potter, Ritchie, Shannon)

While the import and influence of Melville Bell’s “Visible Speech” have been notable in many technical and academic fields, research related to it in the fields of rhetoric and composition and writing studies has been scant.  Having been engaged for many years in researching relationships between oral and written communication in college writing instruction with a particular focus on the ways and means by which it became commonplace to separate the two modes of communication, I was led to the work of Melville Bell as one early source where a clear demarcation of the two modes of communication are made.  The potential importance of Bell’s shorthand system in the creation and evolution of college composition programs and the traces of it in a range of ICTs is, frankly, startling.  Having first worked as an elocutionist who worked to improve the speech of individuals with a range of disabilities, including the deaf, by 1860, Bell conceives of written communication as a set of instructions for the production of sounds.  In other words, the body itself becomes a writing instrument.  As such, Alexander Graham Bell’s use of “Visible Speech” in his research related to the development of the telephone connects old technologies of written inscriptions with new technologies of voice communication in much more explicit ways.  Further, the very rationale for Melville Bell’s system of shorthand, itself based on “curing” physical “disabilities” and automating verbal language production, are issues that have themselves been remediated and propagated through the establishment, evolution, and continuation of college composition programs in the late nineteenth, twentieth, and twenty first century U.S.   

Project Engagement With Collections at The New York Public Library’s Stephen A. Schwarzman Building  

Although digital copies of some important books in the history of shorthand are accessible via databases operated by The Hathi Trust, Early English Books Online, Archive.org, Google Books, and various national and international library collections, there is a wealth of material that has yet to be digitized.  Furthermore, one key hypothesis to be explored in this project is how definitions and conceptions of shorthand may change in relation to the specific representational and reproductive technologies available in a given period.  As a result, having the ability to work with and analyze books of shorthand as physical objects will be invaluable to the progress of this project.
While the majority of my research will be dedicated to the Beale Shorthand Collection (1640 – 1910), I also plan to consult the Jerome B. Howard shorthand collection (1710-1912; bulk dates 1838-1912), the National Shorthand Reporters Association Collection, the George Carl Mares Papers, and the Shorthand Miscellany Collection.  Of particular importance to this project are the following resources contained in the Beale Shorthand Collection: 
	•	Boxes 3 and 4, which contain Charles Currier Beale’s papers and manuscripts and promise to shed more light on the history of systems of shorthand in the colonial United States  

	•	Box 9, which contains a typewritten copy of Bright’s 1588 Characterie, the first printed book of shorthand in the West, and John Byrom’s notes on shorthand from his early eighteenth century journals 

	•	Box 14, which contains a list of the shorthand collection compiled by Julius Ensign Rockwell, a stenographer and the author of the several important publications on the history of shorthand

	•	Box 17, which contains John Willis’ The School-Maister (1622) and James Weston’s Stenography Completed (1727), two important books relative to shorthand’s connections to writing and language instruction and school grammars.

Having the ability to utilize the library’s collection in the DeWitt Wallace Periodicals Room will enable my access to a number of important nineteenth and twentieth century serial publications dedicated to shorthand, stenography, and typewriting, particularly the Illustrated Phonographic World (serial; later entitled The Stenographer and Phonographic World: A Monthly Magazine Devoted to the Shorthand and Typewriting Professions).  Finally, I am hopeful that in using the library’s collections, I may also locate a copy of the first book of shorthand published in the United States 1728, Samuel Keimer’s Short-Hand Book, which I have been unable to locate in digital form.

Project Objectives, Outline and Work Plan 2020 – 2021
I plan to complete the draft of two chapters (I and II), which are already in progress, and begin drafting the third chapter (III) during my fellowship at the Cullman Center.  The projected work plan is as follows:  
I. Introduction to 19th c. Shorthand: The “Invention” of Visible Speech (September – December 2020)

II. Was AGB Raised as a Telephone?: The Applications and Import of Visible Speech in the 19th c. U.S. (December, 2020 – March, 2021)

III. The After Lives of Visible Speech: Reception and Remediation of Bell’s Shorthand System in the U.S. and Britain (April – May, 2021)





Project Significance

There has been a growing interest in the history of shorthand in relation to the history of computing machines (Liu), literary and book history (Bowles, Davidson), and writing studies (Harris, Haas).  However, the last comprehensive overview of shorthand was published in 1949 and was published, as most of its predecessors were, by Pitman publishing.  In the context of my own research into relationships between print and digital technologies and the roles of college writing instruction and commercial publishing in both, this project will contribute to the clarification of the roles of one specific ICT in the history of engineering and the history of writing education.  

Works Cited

Bell, Alexander Melville. Visible Speech: The Science of Universal Alphabetics: Or, Self-Interpreting Physiological Letters, for the Writing of All Languages in One Alphabet. Illustrated by Tables, Diagrams, and Examples. Simpkin, Marshall, 1867.
Bell, Alexander Graham.  “Letter from Alexander Graham Bell to Alexander Melville Bell and Eliza Symonds Bell, June 27, 1876.” Library of Congress, Washington, D.C. 20540 USA, https://www.loc.gov/resource/magbell.00500228/?st=gallery. Accessed 6 Sept. 2019.
Bowles, Hugo. “Stenography and Orality in Dickens: Rethinking the Phonographic Myth.” Dickens Studies Annual, vol. 48, 2017, pp. 21–44, https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.5325/dickstudannu.48.2017.0021.
Brereton, John. The Origins of Composition Studies in the American College, 1875–1925. U Pittsburgh P, 1996.
Davidson, Adele. Shakespeare in Shorthand: The Textual Mystery of King Lear. Associated UP, 2009.
Drucker, Johanna. Graphesis: Visual Forms of Knowledge Production. Harvard UP, 2014.
---. The Visible Word: Experimental Typography and Modern Art, 1909-1923. U Chicago P, 1997.
Duchan, Judith Felson. History of Speech - Language Pathology. https://www.acsu.buffalo.edu/~duchan/new_history/hist19c/subpages/mbell.html. Accessed 31 Aug. 2019.
Fuller, Matthew. Media Ecologies: Materialist Energies in Art and Technoculture. MIT, 2007.
Gitelman, Lisa. Paper Knowledge: Toward a Media History of Documents. Duke UP, 2014.
---. “Raw Data” Is an Oxymoron. MIT, 2013.
---. Scripts, Grooves, and Writing Machines: Representing Technology in the Edison Era. Stanford UP, 1999.
Gregg, John Robert. Gregg’s Shorthand: A Light-Line Phonography for the Million. The Author, 1895.
Guest, Ann Hutchinson. Choreographics: A Comparison of Dance Notation Systems from the Fifteenth Century to the Present. Routledge, 2014.
Haas, Christina. Writing Technology: Studies on the Materiality of Literacy. Routledge, 2013. 
Harris, Roy. Rethinking Writing. Continuum, 2005. 
Hill, Adams Sherman. An Answer to the Cry for More English. Good Company (4), 1879.
---, LeBaron R.Briggs, and B. S. Hurlbut. Twenty Years of School and College English, Harvard U P, 1896.
Heim, Michael. Electric Language: A Philosophical Study of Word Processing. Yale University Press, 1999.
Hitz, John. Alexander Melville Bell. Washington, D.C., Volta Bureau, 1905, http://archive.org/details/alexandermelvill00hitzrich.
Howatt, Anthony Philip Reid and Henry George Widdowson. A History of English Language Teaching. Oxford UP, 2004.
Kirschenbaum, Matthew G. Track Changes: A Literary History Of Word Processing. Harvard UP, 2017.  
Knowlson, James.  Universal Language Schemes in England and France 1600-1800. U of Toronto P, 1975,  
Kopp, G.A., and H. C. Green  . “Visible Speech.” The Volta Review, vol. 50, no. 2, 1948, pp. 60–62.
Lévy, Pierre. The Semantic Sphere 1: Computation, Cognition and Information Economy. John Wiley & Sons, 2013.
Liu, Lydia H. The Freudian Robot: Digital Media and the Future of the Unconscious. U Chicago P, 2011.
Lohr, Steve. “Dennis Ritchie, 70, Dies, Programming Trailblazer.” The New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2011/10/14/technology/dennis-ritchie-programming-trailblazer-dies-at-70.html.  
Pitman, Isaac.  A History of Shorthand.  Pitman, 1847.
---.  A Manual of Phonography.  Samuel Bagster, 1842.
Potter, Ralph Kimball, et al. Visible Speech. D. Van Nostrand Co., 1947.
Rockwell, Julius Ensign. The Teaching, Practice, and Literature of Shorthand. U.S. Government Printing Office, 1884.
Ritchie, Dennis M., and Ken Thompson. “The UNIX Time-Sharing System.” Proceedings of the Fourth ACM Symposium on Operating System Principles, ACM, 1973.
---. “The UNIX Time-Sharing System.” Commun. ACM, vol. 17, no. 7, July 1974, pp. 365–375.
Rodgers, Johannah.  Technology: A Reader for Writers.  Oxford UP, 2014.
Shannon, C. E. “A Mathematical Theory of Communication.” The Bell System Technical Journal, vol. 27, no. 3, July 1948, pp. 379–423.  
---. “Prediction and Entropy of Printed English.” The Bell System Technical Journal, vol. 30, no. 1, Jan. 1951, pp. 50–64 
Shoulson, Mark E.  "Visible Speech." http://web.meson.org/write/vispeech.php 
Sweet, Henry. A Handbook of Phonetics. Oxford, 1877, https://catalog.hathitrust.org/Record/100321821.
---. A Primer of Phonetics. Oxford, 1890.
Truby, “Voice Recognition by Man, Animal, and Machine.” Proceedings of the Seventh International Congress of Phonetic Sciences / Actes Du Septième Congrès International Des Sciences Phonétiques: Held at the University of Montreal and McGill University, 22–28 August 1971 / Tenu á l’ Université de Montréal et á l’ Université McGill, 22–28 Août 1971., edited by André  Rigault and René Charbonneau. Walter de Gruyter, 2017.
Weizenbaum, Joseph. Computer Power and Human Reason: From Judgment to Calculation. W. H. Freeman & Co., 1976.
---. “ELIZA—a Computer Program for the Study of Natural Language Communication Between Man and Machine.” Commun. ACM, vol. 9, no. 1, Jan. 1966, pp. 36–45.
Wiener, Norbert. Cybernetics or Control and Communication in the Animal and the Machine. MIT, 1965.
Winograd, Terry, and Carlos F. Flores. Understanding Computers and Cognition: A New Foundation for Design. Ablex Publishing, 1985.

